yo what up I got two more questions from
my nearly infinite pile dealing this
time with matters of vegan ethics and
effective activism in a democratic
contacts from two very different angles
hiroki wrote to ask what I think about a
current biotechnology the ethics of a
current biotechnology that grow human
organs within the bodies of pigs so
technology of this kind has been around
during my lifetime I remember when the
first shocking images were in the
newspapers of a human ear being grown on
the body of a rat a lab rat and the
current method is reported as scientists
growing human organs inside pigs by
injecting human stem cells into Pig
embryos to produce human Pig camara
embryos the purpose of this video is not
to discuss in detail the science behind
this method now Haruki sent this to me
and he was anticipating correctly that I
would respond to this with horror it is
not a shocking new news story to me as I
say technologies along these lines have
been coming during my lifetime I have
read about broadly similar things before
although there are some details to this
approach that are new new to me in 2016
but I think Haruki is basically asking
the question shouldn't this be illegal
because from a vegan perspective it is
immoral now my answer may or may not
surprise you based on how much you have
been watching the videos on this channel
on a very deep level I do not approach
these matters in a dictatorial way I do
not look at morality as something that
one person should decide at one time as
a dictator in the way that you know in
the Catholic Church in theory the Pope
can issue a writ the Pope can issue a
resolution and this is supposedly
infallible and true for all time
thereafter now in reality that's not
even how the Catholic Church works of
course but on a very deep level I
instead see a public morality as
something that can and should be debated
by large numbers of people and it
open-ended an ongoing process even where
I personally have a strongly held view
so this partly relates the question of
democracy and it partly relates to the
philosophy of knowledge supported by
Karl Popper call poppers a modern
philosopher not an ancient one but Karl
Popper you know put forward a theory of
falsifiability of knowledge which
basically there are many elements to it
but one important aspect of what he had
to say of a human knowledge is that it's
important that we're honest with
ourselves about why we believe things
and what could prove us wrong so in this
case you know this is the morality of
exploiting pigs to grow human organs
inside their bodies now it does seem to
me that this crosses the line that this
crosses every line that this crosses a
bunch of moral lines I'd never even
imagined to me that seems morally wrong
uh from A to Z you know it seems
completely immoral and unforgivable but
I recognize the limits of my own
knowledge I'm not an expert on this not
at all I've read this much correct and
there are other people who are experts
and I recognize that even though my
feelings about this are strong I could
be proven wrong I could learn more about
this someone could explain something
about this to me that really changes my
mind so I acknowledge the falsifiability
of my own views that my views are not
divine they aren't absolute they're
subject to change and even if someone
couldn't convince me of that today maybe
in time the facts themselves will change
like maybe in the next 20 years the
nature of this technology will change in
such a way that I could be persuaded
although as they say even though that's
hard to imagine I'm really insisting on
on the importance that here but as I've
already alluded to also I do not think
of
myself as the Pope neither of veganism
nor of what law and morality should be
in Canada nor what law and morality
should be in the whole world I really
think that there should be a public
discourse where the people who are
experts on this issue have the
opportunity to convince me to convince
my fellow rational human beings and were
ultimately there's some kind of a vote
to decide it now the ultimate example
this especially in Canada you know is
the question of the morality of abortion
it's still debated in Canada but
ultimately in Canada the morality of
abortion but the reality of abortion was
decided by a referendum so any time the
government doesn't want to deal with it
all they have to say is look we had a
referendum you know the people decided
and you know I do think the question can
be asked repeatedly you can't have the
same referendum every five years but
whatever every 25 years if you want to
you can have a referendum on that issue
and it's certainly a wonderful luxury to
feel that you live in a country where
you respect the majority of voters
enough that issues like that can be
debated discussed and decided through a
democratic club aside uh let's say you
live in a country where the majority of
people are devout Catholics do you
believe that a referendum can decide gay
rights you know you guys have already
guessed we haven't heard me say a
hundred times you know I support equal
rights for gays etc I do but if I live
in a country where that's a minority
view what's the road ahead is the road
ahead for an unpopular minority to seize
control of the government and to force
enforce legislation that's wildly
unpopular with the vast majority of
people or is there a road ahead that
convinces the majority of the public
look even though you may be a devout
Catholic I need you to respect this as a
principle of Human Rights that improves
lives for your fellow man and that
improves our society as a whole because
there are many things that I may
disagree with person
I that nevertheless may improve society
as a whole I another debatable example
should gambling be legal or illegal for
me personally I feel totally comfortable
with gambling being illegal one hundred
percent illegal I feel that way but I
want to live in a society where that's
not decided by one dictator by one
people figure where it's not decided by
one matter of principle handed down by a
king or dictator for all time and I can
recognize that I might be proven wrong
you know maybe if people have real
expertise that really studied the issue
you know the social impacts of gambling
maybe they can put together a very
convincing argument that you know what
there are there's harm and there are
also benefits and that for us to all
live together as a society really I
should be tolerant towards gambling and
that legalization of gambling is an okay
thing for a sizable maybe I can be
convinced of that maybe the majority of
people in my society can be committed
that but maybe that process has a kind
of value that's more important than what
I think or what you think um so I think
those questions are really of tremendous
fundamental importance even when I'm
looking something as horrifying as
growing human organs inside the body of
a pig do I think it's morally wrong yes
I think it's unforgivable I think it's
an abomination but I don't think my
opinion counts are much and I mean I
think nobody on the planet should ever
wear alligator boots again you know
boots made out of the skin of value i
just see no reason i see no moral
justification for why that should exist
there's no technological need for it
there's no medical need for it there was
no social benefit for it obviously by
contrast there must be some benefit you
know to human health to doing these
terrible things to pigs right so I can't
even get the majority of people to agree
with me that we can get rid of something
that is just created for vanity has zero
practical use like alligator boots or
ostrich boots killing an ostrich to make
a pair of boots out of it when
technologically there's absolutely no
need for it there's no benefit publicly
what have you so obviously there
uphill battle were looking at whenever
we look at questions of exploiting
animals for medical research or for
actual medical treatment so if you live
in a society where fur and leather where
you can't even convince ten percent of
the population to abolish those things
when there's no benefit you have to
recognize you know the depth and the
length of the struggle to getting
getting people on your side and
motivated to care about animal rights
when respecting animal rights really
will cost them something okay that's
enough for that one uh so but effective
activism and organizing vegans Mike on
raw rights to ask me when we look at
ways to spread veganism so sorry mike
conroy he has his own youtube channel so
that's not his real name that's its
youtube channels name you can check him
out he says when we look at ways to
spread veganism ways to make a
difference if there is a large group
that already exists an organized group
and that has a community that already
have offices that already have
organization and so on is there value
for in trying to work inside the group
and to help them become not only better
as the group that they are but a vegan
version of the group of they are so
whether that's within mothers against
drunk driving or let's say he doesn't
give it an example what if it's a
wilderness conservation society of
forming a vegan as a vegan infiltrating
an existing wilderness Conservation
Society um instead of trying to set up
your own thing now to be honest with you
we're basically talking about a Western
democratic political context here no
actually I don't think that's going to
be effective and I do think I mean you
know we talked about this in a relaxed
down to earth way on this channel right
now but I also talked about on this
channel the ways in which veganism is
shocking and is emotionally disturbing
for vegans themselves you know for your
parents if your parents delete meat and
they have to confront their own kid
about these issues all of a sudden a
video vegan is like we're being asked
about veganism tears families apart
husbands who divorce their wives /
veganism exists parents who hate their
kids and kids who hate their parents you
know it actually is something tremendous
acrimonious for a lot of us in our in
our personal lives and it is such a
fundamental question of ethics it does
impact us at least three meals a day
every day and it impacts the couch
you're sitting on you know whether or
not you're sitting on a leather couch
whether or not you're wearing a you know
leather wristband for your watch and all
these small things I do think that the
nature of the challenge to modernity
posed by veganism is so fundamental and
is so uncomfortable people to deal with
that you cannot just slide into an
existing wilderness conservation group
like the Sierra Club or like the Green
Party in Canada or Ducks Unlimited you
know the wetland preservation I do not
think you can just you know form a vegan
cell within those organizations and
expect them to move your direction I
think you can set up separate vegan
foundations and then collaborate with
and cooperate with meat-eating
foundations and the advantage of that of
having a separate organization is that
then the nature of the collaboration
cooperation is explicit so you're
writing down on a piece of paper look we
appreciate that you guys do habitat
conservation but you guys also engage in
hunting and you guys also for
fundraisers sell hamburgers and hotdogs
p that may not sound like a small thing
up but mean on a practical level you
know if you join a group even it's a
it's a cancer charity but there they are
actually selling hamburgers as part of
their fundraiser for you as a vegan can
you participate in that you know what's
wrong on so many levels you know it's
bad for the animals you know it's bad
for the people who are eating the
animals you know it's bad for ecology
the nature of the ethical karma is on a
daily basis of being in a a meat-eating
charity of any kind you know I again in
the kind of cultural context we're
talking about here no it is very very
difficult for me to imagine that that
working for everything from the
fundraising to to the practice itself
but if you do have a you know separate
organization then I think the question
of actually having explicitly written
operation agreement where you talk to
another group and say look we're vegan
you're not we understand that we hope
you respect our position here's what we
have in common what we have in common is
habitat conservation what we have in
common is we're trying to improve the
water quality in a specific river and we
as vegans were really interested in the
pollution caused by the meatpacking
industry or by the you know animal
agriculture that's on this river and you
as a separate foundation you have some
different priorities different agenda
but we can cooperate on some issues it
here it is I think that working that it
explicitly can be tremendously positive
but otherwise if you try to let it be it
unstated and implicit issue where you're
working inside another foundation I
think the acrimony and the agony
day-to-day is just going to be
impossible and that's the sense in which
veganism is an identity and it's like
identity politics if we were talking
about gay rights do you need to have a
separate gay rights foundation or can
you as a gay person work inside a
homophobic organization an organization
that I sell that may sound ridiculous
back in the 1970s it wasn't ridiculous
and back in the 1970s not that long ago
the vast majority of the big charities
were homophobic and often might have a
stated rule that they don't employ
people who openly admit that they're gay
or things like that and may you know
they may be charities accomplishing good
things but that openly say they they
made they have homophobic mandates
homophobic issues uh obviously I mean
some gay people did there were plenty of
gay people in the closet who engaged in
charity work in political work of
different kinds inside homophobic
organizations however you could never
get those organizations to transform
themselves into gay rights organizations
that way no you needed to have separate
self-identified gay rights organizations
and as I've mentioned many many times
lately often you had much more specific
organizations not just gay rights in
general a specific gay group a group of
gay professionals you know it could
indeed be gay architects who want to be
out of the closet who want to be
recognized as such even though
architecture is not linked homosexuality
but say look we want to have a
foundation that gives us a voice makes
us visible gives us a presence so it
could be specific
specific sexual minorities within gay
rights movement but it could be specific
professions specific special interests
and you know there can be a kind of
strength in the the cohesiveness and
passion you have with those those highly
focused organizations because again once
we're into real activism there's no
money involved there's no fame there's
none of this BS that we have on YouTube
motivating people to act the way they
act and do the things they do okay guys
another I hope useful discussion for
some of you just answered two questions
in 60 minutes thanks all for tuning in